The work conducted in this report describes a workflow and evaluation of PBPK modeling within liver disease, building upon the work by Edginton and WIllmann (1) and Johnson, Boussery (2). Liver disease incorporates many known physiological changes such as alterations in blood flow, reduction in protein synthesis (albumin, AAG) and reductions in glomerular filtration rate. Intuitively, the physiological alterations because of the disease affect the PK of drugs, regardless whether or not the liver is the primary clearing organ. By accommodating known physiological and physicochemical changes across disease severity, this work reasonably predicted the PK of a range of compounds metabolized by CYP enzymes and administered intravenously or orally. 

Over the entirety of this work, the workflow described was adequately able to demonstrate that clearance and exposure of drugs are altered across the disease spectrum. However, this work is not without limitations. Firstly, disease severity within the simulations was based upon the Child-Pugh classification system. This prognostic tool was created to estimate the severity of liver impairment endured, utilizing laboratory values (i.e., total bilirubin, INR, albumin concentration) and clinical characteristics (i.e., presence of encephalopathy and/or ascites). Although it may be useful in describing the severity of liver disease, its purpose was not to describe the impact disease may have on the pharmacokinetic profile of drugs. As such, subjectivity in prognostication lies at the hand of the assessor. 

Secondly, estimated reductions in clearance appeared to be greater than observed values within the most advanced stages of liver impairment (Child-Pugh C). Over predicting the impact of disease on clearance resulted in consistently over predicting total exposure in those individuals. Reasons for this, as described by Edginton, Willmann (1), include incorporating CYP activity data from liver tissue samples from diseased individuals. The reduction in CYP activity may include reductions in functional liver mass, resulting in overestimation of the true impact of disease on intrinsic clearance. 

Additionally, the performance of the simulations of orally administered compounds was mixed. Changes in blood flow to the intestinal tract and reductions in CYP enzyme expression have been noted to decrease the first-pass metabolism within the gut. Inaccuracy in the reduction of CYP activity within the intestinal tract included throughout the simulations may have resulted in the underpredictions of Cmax in those with advanced liver disease. Further work is needed to fully characterize the impact of disease on first-pass metabolism within the intestinal tract for orally administered compounds within this population.

Finally, many of the published pharmacokinetic studies used for model evaluation lacked necessary information to assess the clinical status of disease for participants. Patient demographics and clinical characteristics were consistently under reported. Assumptions were made based on reported data, and in the absence of any clinical characteristics, simulations of each Child-Pugh classification were conducted to be compared against observed parameters.  

The work within this report provides evidence that incorporating known physiological and physicochemical alterations seen with liver disease within a PBPK model provides reasonable predictions of the pharmacokinetics. Despite the limitations noted above, this workflow may still be seen as a useful tool in providing pharmacokinetic estimations of compounds administered to patients with liver disease. This work may serve as a foundational piece for clinical trial planning by minimizing potential exposures to vulnerable patient populations. Future research is still needed to investigate the impact of first-pass metabolism, assess the accuracy of predictions for compounds metabolized by enzymes not included within this report and the impact of disease on those compounds undergoing predominantly phase II metabolism.

In conclusion, a workflow is provided to simulate the affects of liver disease on the pharmacokinetics of 9 different compounds. Physiological alterations affecting the ADME of such compounds were included within each simulation, providing reasonable predictions when compared to previously published literature. The impact of this work may aid in clinical trial design by minimizing potential exposure to this vulnerable population, despite its current limitations. Future research is needed to build upon this modelling strategy to accurately describe the PK of medications administered to patients with varying disease severity. 